---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogLayout.astro
title: "ES6 Classes"
date: Jun 6, 2024
---

# ES6 Classes in ~~Playwright~~ ECMAScript

Over the course of my work with node-based projects, I keep finding myself interally cringing when encountering classes
in Javascript/Typescript.
Perhaps my gut reaction is because I came into professional programming by being the only person with the time and the
willingness to maintain the work. My introduction was heavily JS influenced, and classes were just a buzzword until I
was a few years into my career.

I appreciate and take full advantage of encapsulation and dependency injection, but as I've branched into real OO
languages (Java, C#), I've found myself making assumptions when having to work in JS classes that have come back to bite
me.
Whenver I see a class in a JS/TS project, I can't help but think "Why not just use a function?". Composed,
type-protected factory functions and closures feel like they can do everything a class can do, but with less overhead
and less cognitive load.

---

## The Good...

When the domain is simple and nobody succumbs to the temptation to over-engineer, classes can get the job done and send
everyone home happy. Maybe your team got fancy and did a bit of abstract definitions and interfaces, but the code is
still readable and maintainable.

```ts
class Animal {
  constructor(name) {
    this.name = name;
  }
  
  speak() {
    console.log(`${this.name} makes a noise.`);
  }
}

class Dog extends Animal {
  constructor(name) {
    super(name);
  }
  
  speak() {
    console.log(`${this.name} barks.`);
  }
}

const a = new Animal('Animal');
a.speak(); // Animal makes a noise.

const d = new Dog('Mitzie');
d.speak(); // Mitzie barks.
```

---

## The Bad...

As best as I've been able to tell, the entire reason for explicit class syntax being introduced to
the ECMAScript standard was to make it easier for people coming from other OO languages to contribute to front-end
projects. Like ENUMS, classes are a syntax feature that was bolted on to the language to make it more palatable to
developers from 'real' OO languages.

But in the JS world, prototypes are the real deal. Dressing them up in OO languages cannot change how the language
actually works, and the existing implementation of classes can be a bit of a minefield. I will now shamelessly crib
from [one of my preferred articles on the topic](https://www.toptal.com/javascript/es6-class-chaos-keeps-js-developer-up)

---

> ## JavaScript Pop Quiz: What Does the Following Code Do?

```js
function Proto() {
  this.name = 'Proto'
  return this;
}

Proto.prototype.getName = function () {
  return this.name
}

class MyClass extends Proto {
  constructor() {
    super()
    this.name = 'MyClass'
  }
}

const instance = new MyClass()

console.log(instance.getName())

Proto.prototype.getName = function () {
  return 'Overridden in Proto'
}

console.log(instance.getName())

MyClass.prototype.getName = function () {
  return 'Overridden in MyClass'
}

console.log(instance.getName())

instance.getName = function () {
  return 'Overridden in instance'
}


console.log(instance.getName())
```

> The correct answer is that it prints to console:
>

```
> MyClass
> Overridden in Proto
> Overridden in MyClass
> Overridden in instance
```

> If you answered incorrectly, you don’t understand what class actually is. This isn’t your fault. Much like Array,
> class is not a language feature, it’s syntactic obscurantism. It tries to hide the prototypical inheritance model and
> the clumsy idioms that come with it, and it implies that JavaScript is doing something that it is not.

---

I had burned myself several times without really knowing why when I first read this article. I find that it's always
cathartic to
have someone you've never met explain why you've been feeling a certain way about a topic. As I've done work in both
class-y and class-less projects, I've found that the class-less projects are easier to maintain and refactor. I've also
found that the class-y projects encounter more issues as a result of their syntax misleading the developers into
thinking they're working in a language paradigm that they're not. *Everything* in JS is an object, and the class syntax
is just a way to make it look like the class definitions are immutable.

---

In the abstract, using classes is fine. But I feel that if you want to use JS/TS professionally, you are better served
by taking the time to understand how the language actually works and, having done so, the appeal of classes will
diminish.
At the end of the day, the ultimate goal is codifying your intent as clearly as possible. Classes necessarily obfuscate
certain aspects of the language, and I find that the more I work with them, the more I find myself fighting the
constructs to get them to do what I want.